Release Notes for release v0.28.0 of PennyLane (#3517)
PennyLaneAI/pennylane: doc/releases/changelog-0.28.0.md

  
  ```python
  from pennylane.measurements import SampleMeasurement

  class CountState(SampleMeasurement):
      def __init__(self, state: str):
          self.state = state  # string identifying the state, e.g. "0101"
          wires = list(range(len(state)))
          super().__init__(wires=wires)

      def process_samples(self, samples, wire_order, shot_range, bin_size):
          counts_mp = qml.counts(wires=self._wires)
          counts = counts_mp.process_samples(samples, wire_order, shot_range, bin_size)
          return counts.get(self.state, 0)

      def __copy__(self):
          return CountState(state=self.state)
  ```

  We can now execute the new measurement in a QNode as follows.

  ```python
  dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=1, shots=10000)

  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit(x):
      qml.RX(x, wires=0)
      return CountState(state="1")
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> circuit(1.23)
  tensor(3303., requires_grad=True)
  ```

  Differentiability is also supported for this new measurement process:

  ```pycon
  >>> x = qml.numpy.array(1.23, requires_grad=True)
  >>> qml.grad(circuit)(x)
  4715.000000000001
  ```

>   For more information about these new features, see the documentation for [`qml.measurements`](https://docs.pennylane.ai/en/stable/code/qml_measurements.html).

Reviewer: Note that the rendering is broken here!

  Creating a custom measurement involves making a class that inherits from one of the classes above. An example is given below. Here, the measurement computes the number of samples obtained of a given state:
  
  ```python
  from pennylane.measurements import SampleMeasurement

  class CountState(SampleMeasurement):
      def __init__(self, state: str):
          self.state = state  # string identifying the state, e.g. "0101"
          wires = list(range(len(state)))
          super().__init__(wires=wires)

      def process_samples(self, samples, wire_order, shot_range, bin_size):
          counts_mp = qml.counts(wires=self._wires)
          counts = counts_mp.process_samples(samples, wire_order, shot_range, bin_size)
          return counts.get(self.state, 0)

      def __copy__(self):
          return CountState(state=self.state)
  ```

  We can now execute the new measurement in a QNode as follows.

  ```python
  dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=1, shots=10000)

  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit(x):
      qml.RX(x, wires=0)
      return CountState(state="1")
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> circuit(1.23)
  tensor(3303., requires_grad=True)
  ```

>   Differentiability is also conserved for this new measurement process:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Differentiability is also supported for this new measurement process:
```

      def __init__(self, state: str):
          self.state = state  # string identifying the state, e.g. "0101"
          wires = list(range(len(state)))
          super().__init__(wires=wires)

      def process_samples(self, samples, wire_order, shot_range, bin_size):
          counts_mp = qml.counts(wires=self._wires)
          counts = counts_mp.process_samples(samples, wire_order, shot_range, bin_size)
          return counts.get(self.state, 0)

      def __copy__(self):
          return CountState(state=self.state)
  ```

  When creating a custom measurement with new attributes defined in `__init__`, the `__copy__` method needs to be redefined similarly to the example above.

  We can now execute the new measurement in a QNode as follows.

  ```python
  dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=1, shots=10000)

  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit(x):
      qml.RX(x, wires=0)
      return CountState(state="1")
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> circuit(1.23)
  tensor(3303., requires_grad=True)
  ```

  Differentiability is also conserved for this new measurement process:

  ```pycon
  >>> x = qml.numpy.array(1.23, requires_grad=True)
  >>> qml.grad(circuit)(x)
  4715.000000000001
  ```

>   In future releases, all of the staple measurements — e.g., `qml.state`, `qml.probs`, and `qml.expval` — will be facilitated with additional subclasses of `MeasurementProcess`. 

Reviewer 3: Okay! I thought that this was concretely planned. If not, I'm okay with removing this 😃

  For more information about these new features, see the documentation for [`qml.measurements`](https://docs.pennylane.ai/en/stable/code/qml_measurements.html).

<h4>ZX Calculus 🧮</h4>

* QNodes can now be converted into ZX diagrams via the PyZX framework.
  [(#3446)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3446)

>   The ZX-calculus is a graphical approach to quantum processes. ZX diagrams are the medium for which we can envision, say, a quantum circuit in the ZX-calculus language, showing properties of quantum protocols in a visually compact and logically complete fashion.

Reviewer 3: I suppose not!
```suggestion
  ZX diagrams are the medium for which we can envision a quantum circuit as a graph in the ZX-calculus language, showing properties of quantum protocols in a visually compact and logically complete fashion.
```

This better?

  >>> circuit(params)
  Graph(20 vertices, 23 edges)
  ```

  Information about PyZX graphs can be found in the [PyZX Graphs API](https://pyzx.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html).

<h4>QChem databases and basis sets ⚛️</h4>

* The symbols and geometry of a compound from the PubChem Database can now be access via `qchem.mol_data()`.
  [(#3289)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3289)
  [(#3378)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3378)

  ```pycon
  >>> import pennylane as qml

>   >>> from qml.qchem import mol_data

Reviewer 3: Good catch

  ...
  >>> circuit()
  tensor([0.        +0.j       , 0.33423773+0.9424888j, 
          1.        +0.j       , 0.        +0.j       ], requires_grad=True)
  ```

* A new gate operation called `qml.FermionicSWAP` has been added. This implements the exchange of spin orbitals
  representing fermionic-modes while maintaining proper anti-symmetrization.
  [(#3380)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3380)

  ```python
  dev = qml.device('default.qubit', wires=2)

  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit(phi):
      qml.BasisState(np.array([0, 1]), wires=[0, 1])
      qml.FermionicSWAP(phi, wires=[0, 1])
      return qml.state()
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> circuit(0.1)

>   array([0.+0.j, 0.9975+0.04992j, 0.0025-0.04992j, 0.+0.j])

Author: correct output
```suggestion
  tensor([0.        +0.j        , 0.99750208+0.04991671j,
        0.00249792-0.04991671j, 0.        +0.j        ], requires_grad=True)
```

  ...
  >>> circuit()
  tensor([0.        +0.j       , 0.33423773+0.9424888j, 
          1.        +0.j       , 0.        +0.j       ], requires_grad=True)
  ```

* A new gate operation called `qml.FermionicSWAP` has been added. This implements the exchange of spin orbitals
  representing fermionic-modes while maintaining proper anti-symmetrization.
  [(#3380)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3380)

  ```python
  dev = qml.device('default.qubit', wires=2)

  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit(phi):
      qml.BasisState(np.array([0, 1]), wires=[0, 1])
      qml.FermionicSWAP(phi, wires=[0, 1])
      return qml.state()
  ```

  ```pycon
  >>> circuit(0.1)
  tensor([0.        +0.j        , 0.99750208+0.04991671j,
        0.00249792-0.04991671j, 0.        +0.j        ], requires_grad=True)
  ```

* Create operators defined from a generator via `qml.ops.op_math.Evolution`.
  [(#3375)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3375)

>   `qml.ops.op_math.Evolution` defines the exponential of an operator $\hat{O}$ of the form $e^{ix\hat{O}}$, with a single trainable parameter, $x$. Limiting to a single trainable parameter allows the use of `qml.gradients.param_shift` to find the gradient with respect to the parameter $x$.

Reviewer: Note that math in the release notes should use `:math:`

>   ...

Reviewer 2: Maybe `qml.FermionicSWAP` can go after the `CPhaseShift00 ...` entry, so that we have the two controlled ones together (super minor though)

    0.5
    ```

  - `qml.qinfo.transforms.purity` can transform a QNode returning a state to a 
    function that returns the purity:

    ```python3
    dev = qml.device("default.mixed", wires=2)

    @qml.qnode(dev)
    def circuit(x):

>       qml.IsingXX(x, wires=[0, 1])
>       return qml.state()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        qml.IsingXX(x, wires=[0, 1])
        return qml.state()
```
It still works, but would be good to use standard 4-space indent

    ```pycon
    >>> qml.qinfo.transforms.purity(circuit, wires=[0])(np.pi / 2)
    0.5
    >>> qml.qinfo.transforms.purity(circuit, wires=[0, 1])(np.pi / 2)
    1.0
    ```

  As with the other methods in `qml.qinfo`, the purity is fully differentiable:

  ```pycon
  >>> param = np.array(np.pi / 4, requires_grad=True)
  >>> qml.grad(qml.qinfo.transforms.purity(circuit, wires=[0]))(param)
  -0.5
  ```

* A new gradient transform, `qml.gradients.spsa_grad`, that is based on the idea of SPSA is now available.
  [(#3366)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3366)

  This new transform allows users to compute a single estimate of a quantum gradient using simultaneous perturbation of parameters and a stochastic approximation. A QNode that takes, say, an argument `x`, the approximate gradient can be computed as follows.

  ```pycon
  >>> dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=2)
  >>> x = np.array(0.4, requires_grad=True)
  >>> @qml.qnode(dev)
  ... def circuit(x):
  ...     qml.RX(x, 0)
  ...     qml.RX(x, 1)
  ...     return qml.expval(qml.PauliZ(0))
  >>> grad_fn = qml.gradients.spsa_grad(circuit, h=0.1, num_directions=1)
  >>> grad_fn(x)
  array(-0.38876964)
  ```

>   The argument num_directions determines how many directions of simultaneous perturbation are used, which is proportional to the number of circuit evaluations. See the [SPSA gradient transform documentation](https://docs.pennylane.ai/en/stable/code/api/pennylane.gradients.spsa_grad.html) for details. Note that the full SPSA optimizer is already available as `qml.SPSAOptimizer`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  The argument `num_directions` determines how many directions of simultaneous perturbation are used, which is proportional to the number of circuit evaluations. See the [SPSA gradient transform documentation](https://docs.pennylane.ai/en/stable/code/api/pennylane.gradients.spsa_grad.html) for details. Note that the full SPSA optimizer is already available as `qml.SPSAOptimizer`.
```

  >>> param = np.array(np.pi / 4, requires_grad=True)
  >>> qml.grad(qml.qinfo.purity(circuit, wires=[0]))(param)
  -0.5

* A new gradient transform, `qml.gradients.spsa_grad`, that is based on the idea of SPSA is now available.
  [(#3366)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3366)

  This new transform allows users to compute a single estimate of a quantum gradient using simultaneous perturbation of parameters and a stochastic approximation. A QNode that takes, say, an argument `x`, the approximate gradient can be computed as follows.

  ```pycon
  >>> dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=2)

>   >>> x = pnp.array(0.4, requires_grad=True)

Reviewer 3: good catch

  >>> @qml.qnode(dev)
  ... def circuit(x):
  ...     qml.RX(x, 0)
  ...     qml.RX(x, 1)
  ...     return qml.expval(qml.PauliZ(0))
  >>> grad_fn = qml.gradients.spsa_grad(circuit, h=0.1, num_directions=1)
  >>> grad_fn(x)
  array(-0.38876964)
  ```

>   The argument `num_directions` determines how many directions of simultaneous perturbation and, therefore, the number of circuit evaluations are used up to a prefactor. See the [SPSA gradient transform documentation](https://docs.pennylane.ai/en/stable/code/api/pennylane.gradients.spsa_grad.html) for details. Note: The full SPSA optimizer is already available as `qml.SPSAOptimizer`.

Reviewer 3: Makes more sense how you worded it!

>   ```

Reviewer 3: Sorry, I'm not seeing the issue 🤔

* A new method called `pauli_decompose()` has been added to the `qml.pauli` module, which takes a hermitian matrix, decomposes it in the Pauli basis, and returns it either as a `qml.Hamiltonian` or `qml.PauliSentence` instance.

>   [(#3384)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3384)

Author: It is an improvement over the old functionality, but I listed it as a new feature due to the new `PauliSentence` support / integration. I think I would be happy with either characterization. @isaacdevlugt, feel free to move it over as needed.

>   [(#3384)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3384)

Reviewer 3: I think it's _technically_ a new feature, since an entirely new method was created. I'm fine with it staying here 😄

* `Operation` or `Hamiltonian` instances can now be generated from a `qml.PauliSentence` or `qml.PauliWord` via the new `operation()` and `hamiltonian()` methods.
  [(#3391)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3391)

  ```pycon
  >>> pw = qml.pauli.PauliWord({0: 'X', 1: 'Y'})
  >>> print(pw.operation())
  PauliX(wires=[0]) @ PauliY(wires=[1])
  >>> print(pw.hamiltonian())
    (1) [X0 Y1]
  >>> ps = qml.pauli.PauliSentence({pw: -1.23})
  >>> print(ps.operation())
  -1.23*(PauliX(wires=[0]) @ PauliY(wires=[1]))
  >>> print(ps.hamiltonian())
    (-1.23) [X0 Y1]
  ```
* A `sum_expand` function has been added for tapes, which splits a tape measuring a `Sum` expectation into mutliple tapes of summand expectations, and provides a function to recombine the results.

>   [(#3230)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3230)

Author: This is new as previously we couldn't split a tape containing a single `Sum` operator into multiple, but it is very similar to how we do hamiltonian expansion. Again, I think it fits in either place, so no preference between where to place it.

>   [(#3230)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3230)

Reviewer 3: Yeah, again there is definitely a grey area between improvements and new features sometimes. But, I think this is _technically_ a new feature.

  
<h4>(Experimental) More interface support for multi-measurement and gradient output types 🧪</h4>

* The autograd and Tensorflow interfaces now support devices with shot vectors when `qml.enable_return()` has been called.
  [(#3374)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3374)
  [(#3400)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3400)

  Here is an example using Tensorflow:

  ```python
  import tensorflow as tf

  qml.enable_return()

  dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=2, shots=[1000, 2000, 3000])

>   @qml.qnode(dev, diff_method="parameter-shift", interface="tf")

Reviewer 2: On line 356, please can we add:
`>>> a = tf.Variable(0.4)`

Reviewer 3: Good catch!

         [-0.38466667, -0.19233333,  0.        ,  0.        ,  0.19233333]])>
  ```

> * The PyTorch interface is now fully supported when `qml.enable_return()` has been called, allowing the calculation of Jacobian and Hessian using custom differentiation methods (e.g., parameter-shift, finite difference, or adjoint).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The PyTorch interface is now fully supported when `qml.enable_return()` has been called, allowing the calculation of the Jacobian and the Hessian using custom differentiation methods (e.g., parameter-shift, finite difference, or adjoint).
```

  [(#3416)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3414)
  
  ```python
  import torch

  qml.enable_return()

  dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=2)

>   @qml.qnode(dev, diff_method="parameter-shift", interface="torch")

Reviewer 2: There is a typo on line 387 with an extra `>`

Reviewer 3: Just making sure you're paying attention. Totally left that there on purpose

      return qml.expval(qml.PauliZ(0)), qml.probs([0, 1])
  ```

  ```pycon

>   >>> a = tf.Variable(0.4

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  >>> a = tf.Variable(0.4)
```

> * Updated `qml.transforms.metric_tensor`, `qml.transforms.adjoint_metric_tensor`, `qml.qinfo.classical_fisher`, and `qml.qinfo.quantum_fisher` to support the new return types.

Reviewer 2: Could we move these smaller points down to improvements?

Reviewer 3: Sure!

  [(#3449)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3449)

* Updated `qml.transforms.batch_params` and `qml.transforms.batch_input` to support the new return types.
  [(#3431)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3431)

* Updated `qml.transforms.cut_circuit` and `qml.transforms.cut_circuit_mc` to support the new return types.
  [(#3346)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3346)

<h3>Improvements 🛠</h3>
  

> * Multiple mid-circuit measurements can now be combined arithmetically to create new conditionals.

Reviewer 2: I think this is worth of being a new feature. E.g., in "New transforms, functions, and more"

  [(#3159)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3159)

  ```python

>   def circuit():

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  dev = qml.device("default.qubit", wires=3)

  @qml.qnode(dev)
  def circuit():
```

  [(#3276)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3276)

* `qml.Tracker` now also logs results in `tracker.history` when tracking the execution of a circuit.

>    [(#3306)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3306)

Reviewer: There is inconsistent indentation here, causing a rendering error

  [(#3471)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3471)

* Devices can now disregard observable grouping indices in Hamiltonians through the optional `use_grouping` attribute.
  [(#3456)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3456)

* Add the optional argument `lazy=True` to functions `qml.s_prod`, `qml.prod` and `qml.op_sum` to allow simplification.
  [(#3483)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3483)

* Updated the `qml.transforms.zyz_decomposition` function such that it now supports broadcast operators. This means that single-qubit `qml.QubitUnitary` operators, instantiated from a batch of unitaries, can now be decomposed.
  [(#3477)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3477)

* Reduce usage of `MeasurementProcess.return_type`. Use `isinstance` checks instead.
  [(#3399)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3399)

* The performance of executing circuits under the `jax.vmap` transformation has been improved by being able to leverage the batch-execution capabilities of some devices.
  [(#3452)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3452)

> * The tolerance for converting openfermion Hamiltonian complex coefficients to real ones has been modified to prevent conversion errors.
>   [(#3363)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3363)

Reviewer 3: I think it's the wrong PR?
```suggestion
* The tolerance for converting openfermion Hamiltonian complex coefficients to real ones has been modified to prevent conversion errors.
  [(#3367)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3367)
```

>   [(#3363)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3363)

Author: Yea that's probably what happened

  [(#3413)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3413)

* A warning now appears when creating a `Tensor` object with overlapping wires, informing that this can lead to undefined behaviour.
  [(#3459)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3459)

* Extended the `qml.equal` function to `qml.ops.op_math.Controlled` and `qml.ops.op_math.ControlledOp` objects.
  [(#3463)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3463)

* Nearly every instance of `with QuantumTape()` has been replaced with `QuantumScript` construction.
  [(#3454)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3454)
  
* Added `validate_subspace` static method to `qml.Operator` to check the validity of the subspace of certain
  qutrit operations.
  [(#3340)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3340)

* `qml.equal` now supports operators created via `qml.s_prod`, `qml.pow`, `qml.exp`, and `qml.adjoint`.
  [(#3471)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3471)

* Devices can now disregard observable grouping indices in Hamiltonians through the optional `use_grouping` attribute.
  [(#3456)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3456)

> * Add the optional argument lazy=True to functions `qml.s_prod`, `qml.prod` and `qml.op_sum` to allow simplification.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Add the optional argument `lazy=True` to functions `qml.s_prod`, `qml.prod` and `qml.op_sum` to allow simplification.
```

  ```python
  def statistics(self, circuit: QuantumTape, shot_range=None, bin_size=None):
  ```
  [(#3421)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3421)

> * The `MeasurementProcess.return_type` argument has been removed from the `__init__` method. Now it is a property of the class.
>   [(#3434)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3434)
> 
> * The `MeasurementProcess` class is now an abstract class.
>   [(#3434)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3434)

Reviewer 3: @Jaybsoni How about this to address the comment above?
```suggestion
* The `MeasurementProcess` class is now an abstract class and `return_type` is now a property of the class.
  [(#3434)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3434)
```

Author: Perfect 💯

  [(#3361)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3361)

* If the device originally has no shots but finite shots are dynamically specified, Hamiltonian expansion now occurs.
  [(#3369)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3369)

* `qml.matrix(op)` now fails if the operator truly has no matrix (e.g., `qml.Barrier`) to match `op.matrix()`.
  [(#3386)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3386)

* The `pad_with` argument in the `qml.AmplitudeEmbedding` template is now compatible with all interfaces.
  [(#3392)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3392)

* `Operator.pow` now queues its constituents by default.
  [(#3373)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3373)

* Fixed a bug where a QNode returning `qml.sample` would produce incorrect results when run on a device defined with a shot vector.
  [(#3422)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3422)

* The `qml.data` module now works as expected on Windows.
  [(#3504)](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/pennylane/pull/3504)

<h3>Contributors ✍️</h3>

This release contains contributions from (in alphabetical order):

> 

Reviewer 2: ![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/49409390/207692357-b18a91d4-0375-4252-bce8-24f638ac9e83.png)
This doesn't show up great (no commas). I think it's easier for devs to go 1-person-per-line, but when we finalize the changelog we should make sure it's comma separated.

Reviewer 3: Sure thing!
